On gaining tenure as an open scientist
######################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: tenure,open science
:date: 2014-12-26
:slug: 2014-open-and-tenured
:category: science

On December 10th, 2014, I was formally awarded tenure at UC Davis,
where I will start as an Associate Professor in the School of
Veterinary Medicine on January 5th, 2015.  In `my research statement
for my job application
<http://ged.msu.edu/downloads/2013-research.pdf>`__, I wrote:

   Open science and scientific reproducibility: I am a strong advocate
   of open science, open source, open data, open access, and the use
   of social media in research as a way to advance research more
   broadly.

I've been an advocate of "open" for decades, and since becoming an
Assistant Professor at Michigan State University in spring 2008, I
have explored a variety of approaches to doing science more openly:

* I `blog <http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/>`__ and `tweet <https://twitter.com/ctitusbrown>`__ about our research.

* `All my senior-author papers are open access and were posted as preprints <http://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=O4rYanMAAAAJ&view_op=list_works&sortby=pubdate>`__.

* `I post all of my single-author grants openly, as soon as I submit them. <http://ged.msu.edu/research.html>`__

* `All of our source code is openly available on github
  <https://github.com/ged-lab/>`__ and most of our papers are written
  in public on github.

* I sign almost all of my paper reviews and `post many of them
  <http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/tag/reviews.html>`__ (the ones that I
  remember to post ;) on my blog.

While being open, I achieved several career milestones, including
publishing several senior author papers, graduating several doctoral
students, giving an invited talk at a Gordon Conference, keynoting
several international conferences, having several highly ranked
universities recruit me, `getting an NIH R01
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/the-future-of-khmer-2013-version.html>`__
(and overall bringing in more than $2m in grants while at MSU),
getting recruited and hired at an Associate Professor level, gaining
tenure, and `becoming a Moore Investigator with sustained medium-term
funding <ivory.idyll.org/blog/2014-moore-ddd-award.html>`__.  There
are certainly many more successful people than me out there, but I
personally don't know what else I could wish for - my plate is full
and I'm pursuing research I believe to be important.

Here are some things I've observed over the years.

**It is possible to achieve some measure of traditional success while
being open.** Grants; publications; tenure. 'nuff said.

**Being open has become an increasingly positive driver of my
career.** Over the years, the benefit of openness has become
increasingly obvious.  I can't actually point to many negatives - the
biggest specific problem I saw was that various people in my
administrative chain at MSU didn't understand why I was pursuing open,
but it's not clear that that had any negative consequences on my
career.  Meanwhile, thousands of people are using our software, I have
a reasonably large and very enthusiastic blog and Twitter following, a
number of papers with lots of citations, more invitations to speak
than I can take, and excellent applications for grad student and
postdoc positions.

**My current research program developed independently of open.** I
think I would have been doing approximately the same things at a
research level whether or not I had been so open about it.  (With my
Moore award, that's changing in the future.)  In particular, some
grant awards resulted from connections made through my blog, but most
did not.

**Open is not the point, and maybe shouldn't be.** I would still
rather hire an excellent closed scientist than a mediocre open
scientist.  But I would definitely push hiring an excellent open
scientist over an excellent closed scientist.  In my case, Davis
definitely didn't hire me because I was an open scientist; they hired
me because they liked my research and training efforts, and because
there was a need for them at Davis.  Open simply didn't figure in.

**Some people will argue that your time is better spent elsewhere...**
Of the six or so letters evaluating my tenure case at Davis, I
reportedly had one letter that was rather negative and argued that I
was not living up to my potential.  My chair agreed with my suspicion
that one of the reasons for this backhanded compliment was the author
of the letter felt I was wasting my time by investing in social media,
open science, and reproducible research.

**...but people can always find a reason to criticize you.** There are
very few science faculty who I think are doing *everything* right, and
even fewer to whom I wouldn't offer friendly advice if asked.
Certainly, If I wanted to tear someone down I could probably do so.
The majority of my tenure letter writers, the entirety of my new
department, and (presumably) the rest of the hierarchy at Davis all
strongly supported my tenure case.

**Most of my colleagues have been very supportive.** Virtually none of
the active research faculty in my departments at MSU question the need
for change, or the utility of open
science/access/source/data. However, they do get stuck on the details
of how to incentivize, drive, and implement open science.  The
majority of negative or "WTF?" comments I've received have been from a
subset of administrators; my most charitable perspective on this is
that administrators are generally much more concerned with policy and
incentives than individual faculty, and consequently weight the
obstacles higher than the opportunities.

**Open science will (eventually) win out in basic research...** There
are too many reasons for granting agencies to support open science for
science to remain closed, absent significant monetary drivers for it
to remain closed.

**...but there's a fundamental asymmetry in closed vs open that's
retarding progress towards open, and scientific progress more
broadly.** A closed scientist can make use of preprints, open source
and open data; an open scientist cannot make use of closed science
products until they are published.  See: `Prisoner's Dilemma
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner%27s_dilemma>`__.  I will have
more to say on this over the next years...

**By remaining so closed, science is ignoring the role of serendipity
in progress.**
I regularly read articles `bemoaning the cost
<http://brunalab.org/blog/2014/09/04/the-opportunity-cost-of-my-openscience-was-35-hours-690/>`__
of `openness
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/12/free-access-to-science-research-doesnt-benefit-everyone/383875/2/>`__,
and I think many of these people are choosing the somewhat certain (but
suboptimal) consequences of being closed over the insecurity of the
uncertain (but potentially very positive) consequences of being open.
As scientific funding becomes every more stringent and competitiveness
grows, the advantages of being conservative will evaporate for all but
the academic 1%.  (As `Shirley Tilghman says
<http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/career_magazine/previous_issues/articles/2014_12_22/caredit.a1400319>`__,
for many "who have succeeded in the system, there appears to be little
to be gained from messing with it".  That's going to change quickly as
the data science asteroid hits science, among other things; I expect
to see fairly rapid turnover in that 1%.)

**Open science needs more practitioners.** A few years back I made a
conscious decisions to be *less* of a cheerleader and *more* of a
practitioner.  I enjoy doing science, and I enjoy talking about it,
and I think the experiments we do in my lab on how to promulgate and
accelerate our science through openness are just as important as the
policy making, the grant funding, the infrastructure building, and
yes, the publicity and cheerleading that is going on. We need it all!

**Scientific culture is generational; change will come, but slowly.**
Most senior scientists (the ones who sit on editorial boards, review
panels, and tenure committees) are already overwhelmed and are
unlikely to change -- as `Mike Eisen says
<http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1673>`__, "the publishing
behavior of most established scientists has proven [...] to be beyond
amendment."  But there's hope; here's a great quote in `the Atlantic
article
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/12/free-access-to-science-research-doesnt-benefit-everyone/383875/2/>`__,
from Virginia Barbour:

    "There's a generation of scientists who are running labs and
    running tenure committees who were brought up on a very different
    system" said Barbour. "I have huge hopes on the generation that's
    coming up, because theyâ€™re a generation built on openness and
    availability, and for a lot of things we're talking about it may
    well take a generational change. It may not be until those people
    are in positions of authority that things will really change," she
    said.

Word.

---titus

Thanks to Tracy Teal for reading and commenting on a draft of this post!
