"Open Source, Open Science" Meeting Report - March 2015
#######################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: open science,osos,cos
:date: 2015-03-24
:slug: 2015-osos-meeting
:category: science

On March 19th and 20th, the `Center for Open Science
<http://cos.io>`__ hosted a small meeting in Charlottesville, VA,
convened by COS and co-organized by Kaitlin Thaney (`Mozilla Science
Lab <http://mozillascience.org>`__) and Titus Brown (UC Davis). People
working across the open science ecosystem attended, including
publishers, infrastructure non-profits, public policy experts,
community builders, and academics.

Open Science has emerged into the mainstream, primarily due to
concerted efforts from various individuals, institutions, and
initiatives. This small, focused gathering brought together several of
those community leaders.  The purpose of the meeting was to define
common goals, discuss common challenges, and coordinate on common
efforts.

We had good discussions about several issues at the intersection of
technology and social hacking including badging, improving standards
for scientific APIs, and developing shared infrastructure. We also
talked about coordination challenges due to the rapid growth of the
open science community.  At least three collaborative projects emerged
from the meeting as concrete outcomes to combat the coordination
challenges.

A repeated theme was how to make the value proposition of open science
more explicit.  Why should scientists become more open, and why should
institutions and funders support open science? We agreed that
incentives in science are misaligned with practices, and we identified
particular pain points and opportunities to nudge incentives. We
focused on providing information about the benefits of open science to
researchers, funders, and administrators, and emphasized reasons
aligned with each stakeholders' interests.  We also discussed industry
interest in "open", both in making good use of open data, and also in
participating in the open ecosystem.  One of the collaborative
projects emerging from the meeting is a paper or papers to answer the
question "Why go open?" for researchers.

Many groups are providing training for tools, statistics, or workflows
that could improve openness and reproducibility.  We discussed methods
of coordinating training activities, such as a training "decision
tree" defining potential entry points and next steps for researchers.
For example, Center for Open Science offers statistics consulting,
rOpenSci offers training on tools, and Software Carpentry, Data
Carpentry, and Mozilla Science Lab offer training on workflows.  A
federation of training services could be mutually reinforcing and
bolster collective effectiveness, and facilitate sustainable funding
models.

The challenge of supporting training efforts was linked to the larger
challenge of funding the so-called "glue" - the technical
infrastructure that is only noticed when it fails to function. One
such collaboration is the SHARE project, a partnership between the
Association of Research Libraries, its academic association partners,
and the Center for Open Science. There is little glory in training and
infrastructure, but both are essential elements for providing
knowledge to enable change, and tools to enact change.

Another repeated theme was the "open science bubble".  Many
participants felt that they were failing to reach people outside of
the open science community. Training in data science and software
development was recognized as one way to introduce people to open
science.  For example, data integration and techniques for
reproducible computational analysis naturally connect to discussions
of data availability and open source. Re-branding was also discussed
as a solution - rather than "post preprints!", say "get more
citations!"  Another important realization was that researchers who
engage with open practices need not, and indeed may not want to,
self-identify as "open scientists" per se.  The identity and behavior
need not be the same.

A number of concrete actions and collaborative activities emerged at
the end, including a more coordinated effort around badging,
collaboration on API connections between services and producing an
article on best practices for scientific APIs, and the writing of an
opinion paper outlining the value proposition of open science for
researchers. While several proposals were advanced for "next meetings"
such as hackathons, no decision has yet been reached. But, a more
important decision was clear - the open science community is emerging,
strong, and ready to work in concert to help the daily scientific
practice live up to core scientific values.

People

`Tal Yarkoni <http://talyarkoni.org/>`__, University of Texas at Austin

`Kara Woo <http://karawoo.com/>`__, `NCEAS <https://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/>`__

`Andrew Updegrove <http://gesmer.com/team.php?PeopleID=67>`__, `Gesmer Updegrove <http://gesmer.com/home.php>`__ and `ConsortiumInfo.org <http://www.consortiuminfo.org/>`__

`Kaitlin Thaney <https://twitter.com/kaythaney>`__, `Mozilla Science Lab <http://www.mozillascience.org/>`__

`Jeffrey Spies <https://twitter.com/jeffspies>`__, `Center for Open Science <http://centerforopenscience.org/>`__

`Courtney Soderberg <https://twitter.com/cksoderberg>`__, `Center for Open Science <http://centerforopenscience.org/>`__

Elliott Shore, `Association of Research Libraries <http://www.arl.org/>`__

`Andrew Sallans <https://twitter.com/asallans>`__, `Center for Open Science <http://centerforopenscience.org/>`__

`Karthik Ram <https://twitter.com/_inundata>`__, `rOpenSci <http://ropensci.org/>`__ and Berkeley Institute for Data Science

`Min Ragan-Kelley <https://github.com/minrk>`__, `IPython <http://ipython.org/>`__ and UC Berkeley

`Brian Nosek <http://projectimplicit.net/nosek/>`__, `Center for Open Science <http://centerforopenscience.org/>`__ and University of Virginia

`Erin C. McKiernan <https://emckiernan.wordpress.com/>`__, Wilfrid Laurier University

`Jennifer Lin <https://twitter.com/jenniferlin15>`__, `PLOS <http://www.plos.org/>`__

`Amye Kenall <https://twitter.com/AmyeKenall>`__, `BioMed Central <http://www.biomedcentral.com/>`__

`Mark Hahnel <https://twitter.com/markhahnel>`__, `figshare <http://figshare.com/>`__

`C. Titus Brown <http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/>`__, UC Davis

`Sara D. Bowman <https://osf.io/d9ehg/>`__, `Center for Open Science <http://centerforopenscience.org/>`__
