A personal perspective on the Open Source, Open Science meeting (2015)
######################################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: open science,osos,cos
:date: 2015-03-21
:slug: 2015-osos-meeting-personal
:category: science

I'm returning from a small, excellent meeting on "Open Source, Open
Science", held at the `Center for Open Science in Charlottesville, VA
<http://centerforopenscience.org>`__. We'll post a brief meeting report
soon, but I wanted to share my particular highlights --

First, I got a chance to really dig into what the Center for Open
Science is doing technically with the `Open Science Framework
<http://osf.io>`__.  I still have to explore it a bit more myself, but
the OSF has built some excellent infrastructure around collaborative
workflows in scientific practice, and I'm tremendously impressed.
Meeting Brian Nosek and Jeff Spies, and having the chance to speak at
length with several members of the OSF team, was worth the trip all on
its own.  They were also wonderful hosts, and everything ran
incredibly smoothly!

Second, I finally met a bunch of tweeps in person, including Kara Woo
of NCEAS (`@kara_woo <http://twitter.com/kara_woo>`__), Erin McKiernan
(`@emckiernan13 <http://twitter.com/emckiernan13>`__), Mark Hahnel of
Figshare (`@markhahnel <http://twitter.com/markhahnel>`__), Jason
Priem of ImpactStory (`@jasonpriem
<http://twitter.com/jasonpriem>`__), and probably others that I'm
forgetting (sorry ;(.  I spent a lot of time talking with Erin
McKiernan in particular - we chatted at length about career challenges
in open science and science more generally.

Third, the willingness and enthusiasm of funders (both federal and
foundation) to engage with open science was palpable.  We got some
great advice on "thinking like funders" - it's all fine and well to
say that open science is better, but it's important to make the case
to people who are open-science naive and want to know exactly which of
their priorities and interests are better enabled by open science
practices.

Fourth, I was *completely* blown away by what Figshare is doing.  Mark
Hahnel gave a great 5 minute talk on how Figshare is growing into the
data sharing space being created by funder mandates.  Tremendously
impressive.

--titus
