A d3.js Local + Remote Workshop
###############################

:author: Jessica Mizzi and \C. Titus Brown
:tags: teaching,d3js,swc
:date: 2015-12-03
:slug: 2015-d3.js-annoc
:category: teaching

Testing out Remote Learning Sites
---------------------------------

Continuing our efforts to bring bioinformatics training to a wider
audience while maintaining small class sizes, we're trying something
new!  This Friday at noon Eastern/9am Pacific, `Emily Dolson
<http://cse.msu.edu/~dolsonem/>`__ will be teaching a half day d3.js
lesson to a class at Michigan State University, and we will be
broadcasting it to three remote classrooms (UC Davis, University of
Florida, and Virginia Tech) using Google Hangouts.  Each location will
host a room of about 35 students with helpers and a room leader.  The
role of the helpers will be the usual assistance with questions or
computer problems, and the room leader is responsible for making sure
that questions are passed up the chain as needed.

In addition to not needing any special equipment, an added bonus of
using Google Hangouts is that we are able to livestream the lesson to
YouTube via Hangouts on Air; the link is at the bottom of this post,
along with time information.

Emily's also made a draft version of `her teaching materials available
<http://emilydolson.github.io/D3-visualising-data/>`__.

Why learn d3.js?
----------------

Want to make pretty, dynamic, and interactive data visualizations like
http://charts.animateddata.co.uk/ukwind/ and
http://mbostock.github.io/d3/talk/20111116/iris-splom.html? D3 (which
stands for Data Driven Documents) is a Javascript library that enables
you to display data in a flexible way. Since it's a Javascript
library, these visualizations can easily be shared either offline or
via the internet. The option to add interactive elements to your
visualization lends itself to making your data easy for others to
explore. The 3-hour workshop will cover the basics of using d3.js to
visualize data. No prior web programming experience required (we'll
teach you the necessary Javascript and html), but this workshop is
aimed at people who already feel comfortable programming in at least
one language.

Livestreaming Links
-------------------------

This workshop will take place at 12:15-3:15pm EST / 9:15am-12:15pm PST.

* You can watch the livestream on YouTube `here
  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eIrZjVH0Zcg>`__.
