An mRNAseq workshop at UC Davis - my first as a Davis prof
##########################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: ngs,dib-training
:date: 2015-03-18
:slug: 2015-a-first-workshop
:category: science

Two weeks ago, I ran a workshop at UC Davis on `mRNAseq analysis for
semi-model organisms
<http://dib-training.readthedocs.org/en/pub/2015-03-04-mRNAseq-semimodel.html>`__,
which focused on building new gene models *ab initio* -- with a
reference genome.  This was a milestone for me - the first time I
taught a workshop at UC Davis as a professor there!  My co-instructors
were Tamer Mansour, a new postdoc in my lab, and Isabelle
Laforest-Lapointe, a microbial ecologist visiting Jonathan Eisen's lab
from Montreal - about whom more, later.

This is the third workshop in my `planned workshop series
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2014-davis-and-training.html>`__ -- the
first workshop was a `Software Carpentry instructor training workshop
given by Greg Wilson and Tracy Teal
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2014-davis-swc-training.html>`__, and the
second was a `Data Carpentry
<http://datacarpentry.github.io/2015-02-09-ucdavis/>`__ workshop given
by Tracy Teal.

Tracy Teal will be running a one-day workshop in April, on `mothur
<http://www.mothur.org/>`__, and I will be giving a two-day workshop
in early May (May 4-5), `on de novo mRNAseq analysis
<http://dib-training.readthedocs.org/en/pub/2015-05-04-mRNAseq-nonmodel.html>`__,
for transcriptome analysis in organisms without a reference genome.  I
will also be teaching at the MBL Microbial Diversity Course and
attending the beginning of the MBL STAMPS course in Woods Hole.
Finally, I will once again host the two week `summer NGS course
<http://bioinformatics.msu.edu/ngs-summer-course-2015>`__ back in
Michigan in August.  Then, in September, I return to UC Davis and get
to actually spin up my full workshop series -- these early ones are
just tasters :).

Note: Software Carpentry instructors are awesome
------------------------------------------------

I needed some help with an R section in the mRNAseq workshop, so I
advertised on the Software Carpentry instructors mailing list; this is
a mailing list for everyone who is an accredited Software Carpentry
instructor, meaning they've been through the training and a bit more.
Lo and behold, one of the people who responded was Isabelle, who was
visiting UC Davis to do some work in the Eisen Lab - no travel needed,
and willing to help out both days.  We corresponded a bit to make sure
she could make the given days, and then just arranged to meet up at
8:30am on the first day of the workshop.

We showed up, she showed up, and it was a great success ;).

Now, I ask you - where else in the world can you e-mail a few hundred
competent, capable, friendly people, and find one who will reliably
show up at a given place and time to teach?

Software Carpentry, peeps. It's awesome.

--titus
