Pubwication of software papers, and authorship on them
######################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: publication, software citation, sustainability, lior yet again
:date: 2015-09-29
:slug: 2015-authorship-on-software-papers
:category: science

*Pubwication. Pubwication is what bwings us togethew
today. Pubwication, that bwessed awwangement, that dweam within a
dweam. And authorship, twue authorship, wiww fowwow you fowevah and
evah. So tweasuwe youw authorship.*

Last week, `our software paper on khmer 2.0 was published on
F1000Research <http://f1000research.com/articles/4-900/v1>`__.  We
intend this paper to be a citation marker, but it also represents and
recognizes some significant software engineering work done between
khmer 1.x and khmer 2.0.

As part of the paper process, we offered authorship to everyone who
has contributed to the khmer git repository - anyone who contributed
to the repo was invited to sign on to the paper.

----

**Addendum**: I would like to credit Michael Crusoe with the initial
suggestion to offer authorship to all git committers. This is in no
way backing away from my own support for this decision, but I only
realized a few days after writing the post that I had failed to
properly credit Michael.  So, kudos, Michael!

----

This policy has caused some consternation amongst the Twitterati, some (well,
ok, one) of whom recoiled in horror at our author list, pointing at
the `recommendations
<http://www.icmje.org/recommendations/browse/roles-and-responsibilities/defining-the-role-of-authors-and-contributors.html>`__
of (e.g.) the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.
These recommendations are that authorship be based on (1) design
and/or analysis, AND (2) writing, AND (3) final approval, AND (4)
accountability.  While the third and fourth criteria were met by all
of the authors of this paper, the first and second were probably not
met by all authors.

A few points are in order:

* our condition for authorship is explicit, verifiable, and
  transparent.  You can look up contributors in our
  `release notes
  <https://github.com/dib-lab/khmer/releases/tag/v2.0>`__ and `GitHub
  repo <https://github.com/dib-lab/khmer/>`__ to find out exactly what
  they did.

  We note that this clarity and verifiability is in contrast to most
  authorship.

* authorship has been getting more complicated, and traditional
  authorship roles are both ill defined and clearly inadequate for
  modern research.  There is an `ongoing effort
  <http://credit.casrai.org/proposed-taxonomy/>`__ to define
  authorship roles more clearly and explicitly, and, coincidentally,
  GigaScience `just announced they're signing on
  <http://blogs.biomedcentral.com/gigablog/2015/09/28/putting-credit-hands-researchers/>`__
  to this.

  For those who are curious, the majority of authors on our
  F1000Research paper fall under #3 on the `CRediT taxonomy
  <http://credit.casrai.org/proposed-taxonomy/>`__.

  (We did not talk with F1000Research about their support for this
  taxonomy in advance.)

* our project is an open source project that is developed by a
  community, with `contribution requirements
  <http://khmer.readthedocs.org/en/v2.0/dev/>`__
  and `an extensive process for contributing
  <http://khmer.readthedocs.org/en/v2.0/dev/getting-started.html>`__.
  Our author list is an explicit acknowledgement of the role that
  the community has played in developing khmer, and the work that
  each and every contributor invested in our process.

* assuming this paper passes into the peer reviewed literature, there
  may be some interesting consequences of our authorship criteria.
  For example, since most formal definitions of Conflict of Interest
  include shared authorship, Jared Simpson and Lex Nederbragt and I
  would now be in conflict and I would be unable to review their
  grants or papers.  This seems silly to me!

----

Speaking with my senior author hat on, I hope it's clear that we are
not trying to mock authorship in any way, and this is a serious
publication on a serious project.

That having been said, we are trying out something new - in
particular, we would like to figure out how to acknowledge software
authorship within the scientific literature, both because it's the
right thing to do AND because we'd like to incentivize community
development of software.  This is part of an ongoing discussion about
the changing roles of contributorship in research (see first point,
above).

On names
--------

Some note has been made of the presence of what people presume to be
pseudonyms in our author list.  There is a long history in science
of choosing a specific name or pseudonym to publish under; see
`Student <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Student%27s_t-test>`__, for
one example (ht `@rgcjk
<https://twitter.com/ctitusbrown/status/648501361261211648>`__) of
very, very many.  We support this tradition.

Respecting peoples' chosen names is also important for many other
reasons.  I suggest people read through the `Nymwars
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nymwars>`__ Wikipedia page, and pay
special attention to the "criticism" section, which raises ethical,
moral, and legal reasons why a "real names" policy is problematic.

Please note that there is a special place in hell reserved for people
who attempt to `deanonymize someone's pseudonym
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doxing>`__ on a whim; this is both
unprofessional and potentially harmful to the individual in question.
Yes, I'm talking to you, Lior.

--titus

p.s. Please comment responsibly! On this post and all future posts, I
am going to follow the `Captain Awkward comments policy
<http://captainawkward.com/site-policies-and-faqs/>`__ - specifically,
"...sometimes comments don't show up because I delete them. This is a
dictatorship, and I can delete any comment at any time for any
reason."
