NGS course 2015 - 2+1 weeks of computing, at a lake!
####################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: ngs-course
:date: 2015-03-27
:slug: 2015-summer-course-NGS
:category: teaching

I've just opened applications for `the 2015 summer course on Analyzing
Next Generation Sequencing Data
<http://bioinformatics.msu.edu/ngs-summer-course-2015>`__.  The course
will run from August 10th through August 21st; for details, `see the
course information page
<http://bioinformatics.msu.edu/ngs-summer-course-2015>`__.

This year there will also be a third week of the course that is
invitation-only.  This third week is devoted to the topics of
up/re-skilling, reproducibility, and data integration.  It will be
much more loosely organized than the first two weeks, with a few
lectures and practicals around a lot of open time.  I hope the third
week will serve three purposes: it should be

1) an opportunity for alumni of the course to engage with updated materials;
   we now have 120 or so alumni, and I know that a reasonably significant
   number of them now do this sort of thing for a living.  They can come
   hang out and go through the newer materials with some support.

2) a way for some of the course instructors to evaluate and trial the
   teaching of newer technology (e.g. Docker) for enabling
   reproducible computing.

3) a meeting of the minds on where the course (and training more
   generally) should go in the future.

I plan to prioritize alumni for this third week, but I will save some
space for other participants who are already doing regular sequencing
data analysis.  If you feel reasonably comfortable with the material
taught in a Software Carpentry workshop and you work with DNA
sequencing data, please consider applying!

The application form for the `third week is here
<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1sO6YQdFLa7c32eHBieXCHxASvCgENUYNAEpkN-CPnwA/viewform>`__.
The form will be open until April 17th, or later if space is available.

For this third week, we are also looking for a few
instructors/lecturers; travel and lodging would be covered.  `Drop me
an e-mail
<mailto:ctbrown@ucdavis.edu?subject=#3rdweek%20instructor>`__ if you
are a trained Software Carpentry or Data Carpentry instructor and are
interested in coming and hanging out with us for a week to develop
materials and approaches!

--titus
